# MAGMA (HBA)
I applied MAGMA to summary statistics from DECODE's meta-GWAS  of seropositive rheumatoid arthritis[@saevarsdottir2022multiomics]. As in my other MAGMA analyses, I sourced linkage disequilibrium reference data from the European subset of the 1000-genomes project. I used a MAGMA gene/cell specificity matrix (i.e. the $E$ matrix in my [notes on MAGMA](../../../Bioinformatics_Concepts/MAGMA_Overview.md) ) prepared as described in Duncan et al.[@duncan2025mapping]


## Results
The results are plotted below, first as a static image, then as an interactive plot:


{{ png_embed("docs/_figs/decode_ra_seropositive_hba_magma_independent_cluster_plot/hba_magma_fig.png", alt="seropositive-ra-hba-magma-static") }}


{{ plotly_embed("docs/_figs/decode_ra_seropositive_hba_magma_plot_extracted.html", id="seropositive-ra-hba-magma") }}



The x-axis corresponds to HBA cluster number[@siletti2023transcriptomic], while the y-axis corresponds to the $-\log_{10}(p)$ score generated by MAGMA.  Clusters are colored according to their HBA supercluster. The dotted line denotes the Bonferroni significance threshold.  I used a conditional analysis approach based on the one described in Wanatabe et al.[@watanabe2019genetic] to identify independent clusters.  These 2 independent clusters are labeled in the static plot. 


It is notable that two independent clusters are immune cell types (T cells and Microglia), consistent with the status of rheumatoid arthritis as an autoimmune disease.  It is likely that the signal represented by these clusters is not brain-specific, but reflects global enrichment of immune pathways in the RA summary statistics.