---
hide:
- toc
---

# S-LDSC 
I applied [Stratified Linkage Disequilibrium Score Regression](../../Bioinformatics_Concepts/S_LDSC_For_Cell_And_Tissue_ID.md)[@finucane2018heritability] (S-LDSC) to summary statistics from Willer et al.'s GWAS of LDL[@global2013discovery] to identify possible key tissue and cell types affecting LDL levels.

## Reference Data Sources

I used the reference datasets recommended and preprocessed by the authors of the S-LSDC method[@finucane2018heritability].  These reference datasets are ultimately drawn from the following data sources:



- [The GTEx Project](../../Data_Sources/GTEx_RNAseq_Data.md)
- The Franke lab dataset
- [The Roadmap Epigenetic Project](../../Data_Sources/Roadmap.md)
- The [Corces et al. ATAC-seq dataset of 13 blood cell types](../../Data_Sources/Corces_et_al.md).
- The [ImmGen](../../Data_Sources/Immgen_Project.md) Project
- The Cahoy Mouse Central Nervous System Dataset

## Results


### GTEx and Franke lab tissue expression data

When S-LSDC is applied to GWAS summary statistics using a reference dataset of cell types, S-LSDC will return cell-type $\tau_i$ coefficients together with associated $p$ values.  A large coefficient and a small $p$ value for a given cell type $i$ suggests that genes related to cell-type $i$ are over-represented in the heritability of the phenotype of interest.

The graph below shows the coefficient p values for the cell types in the GTEx/Franke Lab dataset when S-LDSC is applied to the LDL GWAS.  Cell types are grouped into categories according to the same scheme used in the original S-LDSC paper[@finucane2018heritability].


{{ plotly_embed("../../../_figs/willer_et_al_2023_ldl_eur_multi_tissue_gene_expression_cell_analysis_s_ldsc_plot/sldsc_scatter.html", id="ldl-willer-sldsc-gtex", caption="Results of application of S-LDSC to Willer et al.'s LDL GWAS using the Franke lab/ GTEx dataset. Points are colored according to broad tissue category.  Large points correspond to cell/tissue types deemed significant by an application of the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure at an FDR of 0.01.") }}

Of note: all three significant cell/tissue types are liver-related, consistent with the known biology of LDL[@steinberg2011cholesterol].

### Roadmap Chromatin data

I next applied S-LDSC to the LDL GWAS using reference data generated by Finucane et al.[@finucane2018heritability] from the [Roadmap Epigenetics Project](../../Data_Sources/Roadmap.md). This dataset annotates regions of the genome with the epigenetic marks expressed on those regions in particular tissues. These annotations can then be used for S-LSDC.  The rationale is that if a GWAS finds a region of the genome to be significantly associated with a trait, and epigenetics shows that that region is being up-regulated in a tissue, the tissue may be important to the trait.

{{ plotly_embed("../../../_figs/willer_et_al_2023_ldl_eur_multi_tissue_chromatin_cell_analysis_s_ldsc_plot/sldsc_scatter.html", id="willer-sldsc-chromatin", caption="Results of application of S-LDSC to Willer et al.'s LDL GWAS using the epigenetics reference dataset. Points are colored according to broad tissue category.  Large points correspond to cell/tissue types deemed significant by an application of the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure at an FDR of 0.01.") }}


Again, we find liver-related tissues and cell types, consistent with the known biology of LDL.


### ImmGen data

The next step is to use the S-LDSC reference data derived from the ImmGen project.  There were no significant cell types with this dataset.


### Corces ATAC-seq data

The next step is the use the Coreces ATAC-seq data as a reference.  There were no significant cell types with this dataset


### Cahoy and GTEx-Brain data

The remaining two datasets pertain to the central nervous system.  There are no significant cell types with either of these datasets.  This is consistent with LDL being a largely non-neurological trait.
