---
hide:
- toc
---
# MAGMA HBA Analysis

I applied [MAGMA](../../Bioinformatics_Concepts/MAGMA_Overview.md)[@de2015magma] to the GWAS of Human Herpesvirus 7 of Kamitaki et al.[@kamitaki2025genes] using scRNAseq data from the [Human Brain Atlas](../../Data_Sources/HBA_scRNAseq.md)[@siletti2023transcriptomic] as a reference.


The results are plotted below:

{{ plotly_embed("../../../_figs/kamitaki_et_al_2025_hhv7_hba_magma_plot_extracted.html", id="hhv7-hba-magma", caption="Result of HBA MAGMA applied to Kamitaki et al.'s HHV7 DNA GWAS. The x-axis corresponds to HBA cluster number, while the y-axis corresponds to the negative log p value generated by MAGMA. Clusters are colored according to their HBA supercluster. The dotted line denotes the Bonferroni significance threshold.") }}



I also used a conditional analysis approach based on the one described in Watanabe et al.[@watanabe2019genetic] to identify independent clusters. The two independent clusters are listed in the table below:


--8<-- "docs/_figs/kamitaki_et_al_2025_hhv7_hba_magma_independent_clusters_markdown.mdx"


HHV7 infections are highly prevalent.  As is the case with [EBV DNA levels](../Nyeo_et_al_2025_(EBV)/MAGMA-HBA-EBV.md), it is likely that HHV7 DNA levels are primarily a function of the extent to which a person's immune system is able to contain their infection, and maintain it in a dormant state.  For this reason, it makes sense that T-cells are a key cell type determining HHV7 DNA levels.

The other independent cluster is a microglial cell type.  The interpretation of this cluster is less clear.  Rather than reflecting a true role for microglia in determining HHV7 DNA levels, it may reflect shared transcriptional programs between key innate immune cells and microglia.

## Reproducing Analysis

To reproduce the above, run the [HHV7 Analysis Script][mecfs_bio.analysis.hhv7_analysis].
