---
hide:
- toc
---
# MAGMA HBA
I applied MAGMA to the DecodeME GWAS[@genetics2025initial] using scRNAseq data from the [Human Brain Atlas](../../../Data_Sources/HBA_scRNAseq.md)[@siletti2023transcriptomic] (HBA). As in my other MAGMA analyses, I sourced linkage disequilibrium reference data from the European subset of the 1000-genomes project. I used a MAGMA gene/cell specificity matrix (i.e. the $E$ matrix in my [notes on MAGMA](../../../Bioinformatics_Concepts/MAGMA_Overview.md) ) prepared as described[^matrix_prep] in Duncan et al.[@duncan2025mapping]

## Results
The results are plotted below, first as a static image, then as an interactive plot:


{{ png_embed("docs/_figs/decode_me_hba_magma_tasks_hba_magma_independent_cluster_plot/hba_magma_fig.png", alt="decode-me-hba-magma-static") }}


{{ plotly_embed("docs/_figs/decode_me_hba_magma_tasks_hba_magma_plot_extracted.html", id="decode-me-hba-magma") }}




The x-axis corresponds to HBA cluster number[@siletti2023transcriptomic], while the y-axis corresponds to the $-\log_{10}(p)$ score generated by MAGMA.  Clusters are colored according to their HBA supercluster. The dotted line denotes the Bonferroni significance threshold.  I used a conditional analysis approach based on the one described in Wanatabe et al.[@watanabe2019genetic] to identify independent clusters.  These 3 independent clusters are labeled in the static plot. In the interactive plot, only the top cluster is labeled.  I have also listed the independent clusters in the table below, together with some cluster-annotations from Duncan et al.[@duncan2025mapping].



{{ markdown_table("docs/_figs/decode_me_hba_magma_tasks_hba_magma_independent_clusters_markdown.mdx", title="Independent Clusters") }}⏎                      


The independent significance of the "Eccentric Medium Spiny Neuron" (EMSN) cluster is interesting.  As discussed in [this blog post](https://mecfsscience.org/cell-and-tissue-enrichment-in-me-cfs/) the EMSN is a relatively newly discovered cell type that shows up in a few alternative cell-type-enrichment analysis of DecodeME.


[^matrix_prep]:  Duncan et al.[@duncan2025mapping] first log-transform the raw RNAseq matrix, and then row-normalize it.  Note that this differs from the FUMA approach.  See the Section "Gene expression data" from their paper.  See also their [GitHub repo](https://github.com/Integrative-Mental-Health-Lab/linking_cell_types_to_brain_phenotypes?tab=readme-ov-file).
